---
title: You should look into WebPerf

i18n-key: you-should-look-into-webperf
tags:
    - 'Web Performance'
slug: you-should-look-into-webperf
canonical: https://calendar.perfplanet.com/2020/you-should-look-into-webperf/
canonical_title: 'the Web Performance Advent Calendar'
translations:
    fr: tu-devrais-faire-de-la-webperf
---

Dear fellow web professional, you should be interested in Web Performance. It's
a topic that is at the heart of the web, which needs specialists, and is
booming. I know you don't believe me, or that you think that this is not easy
and you're right. So let me tell you where we stand. and why we need you to join
us.

<!-- more -->

{% include canonical.html.liquid
    locale=page.locale
    title=page.canonical_title
    canonical=page.canonical
%}

I have been doing Web Performance, or webperf, for more than ten years. I have
spoken publicly for the first time in 2012 [^1]. I was suggesting that it was
necessary to approach the subject in four steps: first become aware of the
stakes, then learn to optimize, monitor performance and finally, engage internal
discussions about it internally in order to avoid future damage.

[^1]:
    "<a href="https://boris.schapira.dev/community/performance-web/" hreflang="fr">Mettre
    en place une stratégie de performance web</a>" during <span lang="fr">Sud
    Web 2012</span>.

Eight years later, I still think it's the best way to approach the subject. But
around me, people don't necessarily talk a lot about web performance. For all
those who have not necessarily followed where we are, let's take a look at the
subject.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_Loving_it_re_jfh4.png"
alt=""
%}

The field knowledge is dense, but my goal is not to stifle you with information.
If you want to go further, you'll find lots of footnotes leading to additional
readings.

## A status update

Let's start with some _definitions_.

Webperf is all you can do to make your site be _feel_ as more efficient by a
user. You start from the user experience of your site or web app (including
animations), then you explore the underlying layers: HTML, CSS and JS code, the
server configuration and finally an analysis of the infrastructures and third
party services that you allow yourself to use, and their configuration.

Since a high-performance site _consumes less energy_, web performance shares 90%
of its DNA with eco-design. But some good web performance practices, such as the
use of <abbr title="Content Delivery Network">CDN</abbr>, are not compatible
with ecological considerations [^2].

[^2]:
    Romuald Priol talks about it very well in his post
    "[The digital impact: best practices for a greener web](https://news.infomaniak.com/en/green-web/)".

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_Eco_conscious_re_r2bs.png"
alt=""
%}

It is usually implied that a faster application is more satisfying, but with web
perf, _we have figures that confirm it_. Many brands have commissioned
optimization projects and testify to the gains obtained, especially on the
conversion. [WPOStats.com](https://wpostats.com/) provides case studies and
experiences demonstrating the impact of web performance optimization on user
experience and commercial success. This is an essential aspect because it means
that webperf is an area of web quality whose return on investment is provable.
As a result, investment is facilitated.

Optimising web performance is a skill, and by recognising that skill with the
appropriate compensation, there is a better chance of attracting talent to this
area. There is a good dynamic in the community, which is nourished by articles
on different expertises within web performance. It helps the whole community to
grow.

Vitaly Friedman's "Front-End Performance Checklist" is one of the most
comprehensive resources. It's an in-depth review that is updated annually in
Smashing Magazine. The problem is that you can't simply point anyone to this
kind of file: 53 pages resulting in a 13-page operational checklist [^3] is not
within everyone's reach: it’s a high barrier to entry.

[^3]:
    "[Front-End Performance Checklist 2020: the PDF](https://www.dropbox.com/s/k1oxe5vyrli83zf/performance-checklist-1.3.pdf?dl=0)",
    166 Ko.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_track_and_field_33qn.png"
alt=""
%}

To get to the heart of the matter faster, you can use one of the many _analysis
tools and services_ available in browsers or as services. These tools, called
"synthetic" or "lab" tools, are very useful: they analyze a page load and
instantly produce a contextualized audit report that helps you target the
essential, potential issues [^4]. They can often be used to perform tests with
custom constraints. You can make assumptions like "I think this JavaScript
script execution slows down the page rendering", and then confirm it by blocking
this file and seeing if the display really happens faster. You can also easily
measure the performance of a page against the same page of competitors' website.

[^4]:
    [Dareboost](https://www.dareboost.com), which I work on, is one of those
    tools and I'm very proud of it, but it's far from being the only one.
    [Calibre](https://calibreapp.com/), [Speedcurve](https://speedcurve.com/),
    [GTMetrix](https://gtmetrix.com/), [Pingdom](https://www.pingdom.com/),
    among others, also offer instant reports and tracking. Development teams can
    also use [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/)
    or [WebHint](https://webhint.io/) on their computers.

But the strength of these services is also their weakness: they only measure
what they are asked to measure. They can't tell if the sites are fast _for
people_. If you need to get this information, you will have to turn to analytics
or real user metrics (RUM). The analytics services you already use, like Google
Analytics, may track sufficient web performance Real User Metrics (RUM) [^5],
but to go further in assessing user frustration, you will have to turn to more
elaborate solutions [^6]. However, you'll often need to get your hands into your
code to implement this.

[^5]:
    For example,
    [Google Analytics](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1205784?hl=en).
    Personally, I use Matomo.

[^6]:
    About this, see
    "[User Experience & Performance: Metrics that Matter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEHsHioWY1U&feature=youtu.be)",
    by Philip Tellis.

However, if your website is public and receives a lot of visits, you can use
_field data collected by others_. These datasets are handy, because they are
accessible without installing anything on the sites and therefore, as with
synthetic tools, you can make comparisons between sites. The data is not
necessarily difficult to retrieve, but may be incomplete (for example, only
reporting the performance of Chrome's users, not the other browsers [^7]).

[^7]:
    I'm talking about the
    [Chrome User Experience Report](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-user-experience-report),
    also known as CrUX.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_Data_re_80ws.png"
alt=""
%}

It can often take time to understand field data. Interpreting the results is
very complicated because many factors can affect the measured performance [^8].
If you have a hunch about something, see if you can validate it by
cross-checking with other data, or through synthetic tests.

[^8]:
    "<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?reload=9&v=9PBeqHXk7zw&feature=youtu.be" hreflang="fr">Comment
    interpréter les mesures de performance réelles (RUM metrics)</a>", by Gilles
    Dubuc.

### In a nutshell

Today, the technical knowledge on web performance is largely consensual and
testable via automated analysis tools. Generic field data is relatively easily
accessible if you know where to look, and provides feedback on the implemented
optimizations, the cost of which is easy to finance and the gain to measure.

And yet... if you look at the field data, you can see that the performance of
most sites isn't really improving, for example looking at First Contentful
Paint, one of the well-known metrics for measuring when the page starts becoming
useful, we see no real change over time:

{% capture img_alt %}Evolution of the First Contentful Paint metric from January
2017 to August 2020, measured in Mobile and Desktop contexts.In both cases,
fluctuations are present and often correlated between the two contexts, but
overall, the average value shows little variation or even
deterioration.{% endcapture -%}{% capture img_caption %}Evolution of the First
Contentful Paint metric from January 2017 to August 2020. Source:
<a href="https://httparchive.org/reports/loading-speed#fcp">HttpArchive</a>{% endcapture -%}
{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/timeseries_fcp.png"
alt=img_alt
caption=img_caption
%}

This means that the situation must not improve, as you may think. Let's take a
little tour of the things that are still difficult.

## The road ahead of us

Like many web quality topics, web performance is everyone's business. To improve
the performance of a site, you must not only understand where problems come
from, but also be able to determine who are the right people to contact to solve
them. Since webperf concerns all the aspects of the web, you will soon find
yourself having to talk to very different people. Even on seemingly simple
issues.

Let's take the example of image optimization. When you say it like that, it
sounds simple and a lot of people will feel like they understand. But in order
to approach the topic in its entirety, you have to:

-   Train people to choose the best format based on the image
-   Control the addition of images and trigger the optimization and generation
    of several image variants depending on the context and artistic direction,
    to avoid oversized images
-   Modify the HTML markup and/or possibly set up an image proxy with content
    negotiation (internal or external), so that every user receives an image
    adapted to their own context.

And I haven't even talked about
[lazy loading](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2019/05/hybrid-lazy-loading-progressive-migration-native/)
yet.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_image_viewer_wxce.png"
alt=""
%}

When you start talking about web performance in the enterprise, you’ll quickly
find, _the hardest part is not necessarily the technique_: It's also about
getting different professions to talk together to get an overview of the
situation and the actions to be taken.

This is especially true, since it is sometimes difficult to talk about the same
thing. There are really _a lot of different metrics_ and as if that wasn't
enough, new metrics appear regularly. There are some metrics that have been used
a long time, such as the Speed Index [^9], a reference indicator for almost 10
years. Others are misnamed, or do not allow for decision-making, or inform about
something that is not necessarily paramount. It is therefore necessary to
constantly question not only the metrics themselves, but also the way in which
they are measured.

[^9]:
    "[Speed Index: what is it and how to properly use this performance metric?](https://blog.dareboost.com/en/2018/02/speed-index-web-performance/)",
    by Damien Jubeau.

Often the best way of addressing your own, specific needs is when you use your
own metrics using _customized time milestones_. On the server side, these are
called Server Timings [^10]. On the browser side, these are called User Timings
[^11]. Contrary to other metrics, they correspond to what your team chooses to
monitor. You can find them when you analyze the page in your browser's
development tools and they are collectable by all the analysis tools. Why not
use them?

[^10]:
    "[MDN Server-Timing Documentation](//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Server-Timing)".

[^11]:
    "[Custom Timing : attendez la prochaine frame quand vous utilisez la User Timing API](https://boris.schapira.dev/notes/2019-09-custom-timing-prochaine-frame/)".

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_speed_test_wxl0.png"
alt=""
%}

When you want to optimize the performance of a site, you will sometimes come up
against external libraries used by others to meet business needs. These
libraries often address the business need in terms of functionality. but often
do not consider their impact on web performance. As a result, the people who use
them sometimes have never heard of performance. And require extra work to ensure
they do not impact on performance.

Concretely, it often means that optimization is going to be difficult,
technically or because the people you're going to talk to won't understand this
need. When optimization is really impossible, don't forget to write it down in
*a technical debt repository*so that it can be considered in the next sprint or
redesign.

## Why we need you

The subject of Web Performance, like many subjects of web quality, is a
technical subject. But the knowledge is available and the skills can be learned
with time and investment.

I'm not going to lie to you: it takes a long time to become proficient. But the
acquired skills often do not depend on any framework, any solution on the
market, any trend. It's all about understanding how web standards work: HTTP,
HTML, JS and CSS. It's hard to learn anything more reusable on the web and
believe me: it's worth it.

You will see that whatever your role in the web production chain, you can
acquire these skills and put them at the service of better web performance.

We need people ready to _optimize websites_ – there is a real demand for this.
But it's far from being the only way to participate, in fact it's often at the
end of the chain.

To begin to understand the challenge, we need Data Analysts capable of assessing
usage data and refining metrics, to _better balance between investments and
gains_. Knowing that a topic is relevant because others say so, is not the same
as being able to adjust one's investment according to one's needs and _savings_.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_Business_plan_re_0v81.png"
alt=""
%}

Web Performance must be an integral part of the development of libraries of all
types. Whether it is back-end or front-end, these projects must integrate
_performance as a fundamental need_, in the same way as security or
accessibility should be.

We need designers who think about the way their interfaces are progressively
displayed and prioritize the elements most expected by users in order to
_improve their experience_ [^12].

[^12]:
    See
    "[Mind over Matter: Optimize Performance Without Code](https://stephaniewalter.design/blog/mind-over-matter-optimize-performance-without-code-csscamp-2019/)",
    by Stéphanie Walter.

Are your skills more related to back-end? Great - we also need people like you
to optimize code execution, set up server caching systems, or help develop edge
proxies with a real-time optimization engine that can help optimize a site
quickly while waiting for underlying fixes to be made [^14].

[^13]:
    The French reference solution is
    [Fasterize](https://www.fasterize.com/fr/comment-ca-marche/).

Finally, we also need people to "mediate" all these professions, to nurture and
supervise dialogue, to provide the conditions for success and in particular
training in a "common base of competence" (using something like Opquast [^14],
for example).

[^14]:
    [Opquast](https://www.opquast.com/certification/?lang=en), the benchmark
    certification for all web professionals.

{% include rwd-image.html.liquid
path="/assets/images/web/2020-12-02/undraw_building_websites_i78t.png"
alt=""
%}

For all these reasons, you should look to improve web performance.

And, maybe, you already do it.

---

The illustrations in this article are from the
[Undraw project](https://undraw.co/illustrations), created by
[Katerina Limpitsoun](https://twitter.com/ninaLimpi). You can use them in any
project, commercial or personal, without attribution or fees.

Thanks to [Barry Pollard](https://twitter.com/tunetheweb) who took the time to
rewrite a good third of the article in an English that is a little more
understandable than what I produce myself!
