---
title: Pharaohs
translations:
    fr: pharaons
---

> – So you're going to concentrate on your test, right?  
> – Yes, I'm going to look at the teacher to answer if she questions me.  
> – No, she's not going to question you, you have a written test.  
> – Oh, she won't quizz me ? Then why did I have to study?  
> – [distinguishing each syllable] You have a writ-ten ex-am.  
> – That's a mystery then.

12-year-olds are going to drive me nuts, but I'll stay strong.

> – We've studied hard, we're aiming for 20/20, right?  
> – More like, 15.  
> – Why?!  
> – Well, the test is on 15.  
> – 15/15 or 20/20, these are two fractions and they're equal to 1, do you remember? It's your last math lesson.  
> – Ah yes, if you say so. But if it's all the same, why aren't all the assignments rated on 20?

Ok, that's not the point, but he has a point. Keep being patient, Boris. Let's try an anecdotal approach.

> – See, we talked about the beginning of writing in the Egypt of the pharaohs. At what moment, approximately?  
> – In -3100 BC!  
> – Very well. And you remember, yesterday, we said that all this happened over a very long time. And I told you that there have been pharaohs for a very long time! The last pharaoh Cleopatra lived around 350 BC. About 2800 years later!  
> – ...  
> – It is a very long period. It's longer than the distance between her and us !  
> – Nope, it's the same distance.  
> – Uh no, from -350 to today, there are 300 years less.  
> – But it's the same Nope, Egypt hasn't moved, eh? [Pedantic look, eyes to the sky].

I swear, it's a miracle we survived as a species. I hope that one day, he'll get to read this as a father himself, and understand.
